>> Technology.
My name is Eric Seymour and I manage
the VoiceOver engineering team at Apple.
And I want to thank everyone for coming tonight.
We know that there are other things you
could be doing, other labs, other sessions.
It's been a long exciting week, perhaps a long day.
The fact that you're here tells us
how much you care about accessibility.
We certainly care too and we definitely appreciate it.
So thank you for coming.
So, tonight you're going to learn all about how
to make your applications accessible
with our accessibility APIs in Mac OS X.
Before we get into the technical meat of the presentation,
I'm going to spend a few minutes up front talking
about accessibility from the product perspective.
And this is important because this is how
users who are using accessible technology
with your application are going
to view Mac OS X in your app.
They're going to view it through the
lens of accessibility if you will.
So Mac OS X shipped several targeted
accessibility technologies.
Perhaps you're familiar with them in
our Universal Access preferences pane.
You've got seeing and hearing and keyboard and mouse and
track pad, things that focus on specific special needs.
And some of these things have migrated
over into just regular mainstream use.
For example, like zoom, I know plenty of people who are
sighted with no visual impairment and use zoom all the time.
Also, some of these features work without
any additional work in your applications.
And some of these features work with
cooperation with your applications,
like VoiceOver and of course, that's why you're here.
Your implementations of the NS accessibility
APIs help us provide accessibility for end users.
Now, the other thing that you might
notice, especially if you've got experience
with Mac OS X is sprinkled throughout the operating
system are great universal access features and designs.
So for example, the magnified doc, or magnifying a font for
a phone number or other things are useful for everybody,
not just somebody with a specific visual
impairment for example in this case.
And so these are things that have sprinkled
throughout other products, not just Mac OS X.
Let me just name a few.
In the last year, we've added closed caption support.
We are the first to offer this for digital media.
You can go to the iTunes Store, purchase closed
caption content and run it on any of our players.
We've built it into QuickTime.
So it's a really great feature.
And again, good universal design.
This is good for folks who have a specific need
for this but it's also just useful for everybody.
And then another one is Talking iPods.
I'm sure you've seen or heard or
perhaps even own a Talking iPod.
Another great example of universal
design where certainly somebody
with a visual impairment could
benefit from one of the devices.
But also, it's just a cool device, right?
I mean, who doesn't want to have their
track names read and their menus spoken.
And then there's VoiceOver.
So VoiceOver is screen access technology for Mac OS X.
And basically, it speaks items that are on the
screen, it speaks as a result of user action,
it uses sound effects to embellish the
experience when you can't see the screen.
It's basically a spoken interface
or an audible interface in fact.
And VoiceOver has believe it or not
been shipping now for five years.
For five years we've been here talking about VoiceOver.
And it's pretty exciting.
We've done a lot of cool innovations, but perhaps the most
important thing that's happened is VoiceOver now runs on
and is installed on well over 30
million compu0ters worldwide.
Which is really a phenomenal number.
This is orders of magnitude more than
any shipping screen reader on the planet.
And what this means for you as developers, when you make the
decision to add accessibility or to improve accessibility
in your application for an end user, the barrier to
entry for that end user is completely eliminated.
All that end user needs to use your
application is a Mac, whether it's theirs
or a friend's or the library or in a school.
Every single Macintosh is ready for your app.
Whereas on some other systems, an end user
might have to pay up to 1000 dollars just
to equip the computer to work with your application.
So this is a really big deal and this really
is the cornerstone of universal design.
It's got to be available everywhere on every system.
So we've also and this started
about two years ago with Leopard,
we also pioneered really fantastic plug-and-play Braille.
In fact, I read a quote the other
day on one of the discussion boards
where somebody not only said Apple has clearly the
easiest to configure Braille but it's the most fun.
Right? And so how great is that when we actually produce,
you know take a relatively technical thing
that's a big headache to configure and we make it
so easy that users are starting to say it's fun.
That's really, what we want to go for.
And so because of all of this, we're pretty
proud to have received the Access Award
from the American Foundation for the Blind.
And this is basically for pushing
accessibility into our products,
for pushing accessibility into the iTunes ecosystem.
So really, we're quite proud of this.
And so where, that brings us to now.
Right? So everything I've talked about is Leopard.
We've been shipping Leopard for a while now.
And in the meantime, behind the scenes,
our team has been working feverishly
to bring the greatest Snow Leopard
VoiceOver and Accessibility features ever.
So we've significantly improved VoiceOver for
features, for performance, for enhancements, bug fixes.
We've really, really worked hard and we're
going to bring we think a fantastic release.
There's far too much to show here.
However, there's one feature that's worth showing.
And the reason we want to show it is because we think
that it marks perhaps the turning point
in what it means to be a screen reader.
So let me explain.
So if you take a look at this screen,
if you can see the screen,
it's a website with a bunch of nicely laid out content.
There's so much visual information on this screen,
that if I'm sighted, I can look at and very,
very quickly and efficiently go to the thing I'm
interested in and interact with it right away.
Unfortunately, if I can't see the screen
so much visual information is lost.
Efficiency is lost.
Basically even with modern screen reading technology, the
elements on the screen typically are boiled down into a list
for the end user because it's all
coming through a speech engine.
You know things are just spoken.
So I lose.
How big is that thing?
Where was it placed?
Was the image really big taking the center of the page?
Or not? How do I know?
I don't really know.
And it's really hard to use.
I've got to you know remember keystrokes
and filter my way through.
And so screen reader users actually become quite adept
perhaps far more advanced than nonscreen reader users
because they have to do more steps to get the job done.
And we really want to solve that.
We want users to be able to use their computer
or their device without having to read a manual
and without having a steep learning curve.
And we want to give back, actually, we want to
give for the first time spatial layout information.
And so we thought what if we take this information and
we lay it into the track pad, the Multi-Touch track pad
that every user today purchases and for the most part
hasn't really been focusing on as a screen reader user.
And so this is what we've done.
We've taken content from the screen and we lay it
directly into the track pad so that all you have
to do is touch the pad and it's
as if you're touching the screen.
And you hear sound effects and speech and you can move
your finger around the pad and know what you're touching.
So I can tell how big that image is in the middle.
I can tell where the title is, I know where the menu bar.
I can very quickly rip across the
page and go from point A to point B
without having to filter through dozens of elements.
So the spatial layout piece is totally
there and most importantly ease of use.
Because the learning curve is what it should be.
I should be able to touch the track pad and
it should do what I thought it should do.
And so we really think we've got
a profound advancement here.
This is going to be coming to VoiceOver for Snow Leopard.
And really the best way to experience
this is just to show you.
And so to do that, my colleague here,
David Tseng who works for VoiceOver
on Quality is going to give you a demonstration.
[ Applause ]
>> Thanks everyone.
Hi everyone.
My name is David Tseng and I am a
QA Engineer on the VoiceOver team.
And I'm really pleased today to
be able to show you VoiceOver
and some of the new features in
Snow Leopard that we have coming up.
So I will go ahead and first start VoiceOver
using the Start command, which is Command-F5.
>> VoiceOver on, mail, window,
inbox, 5 messages, 5 unread, toolbar.
>> Alright, great.
So, the first thing I want to point your attention
to is a few of the visual features of VoiceOver,
which allows for great collaboration between
the VoiceOver user and a sighted user.
And it also allows you to follow along
as I move around the user interface.
So the first thing is the caption panel, which
shows everything in print that VoiceOver speaks.
And there's also a VoiceOver cursor,
which currently is on the toolbar.
And it's a rectangular highlight.
And it allows you to follow me as I move around
in the user interface and highlights the focus.
So today I wanted to go through something that we all
pretty much do every day, which is read and send email.
And I'm just going to go ahead and use the keyboard and
navigate around and give you a feel of how VoiceOver reads.
>> Mailboxes, table, one row selected.
Column 1 of 1.
Inbox, mailbox, 5 unread.
>> So I just want to stop and point out that you heard
VoiceOver reading quite a bit of information just there.
The mailboxes table, column 1 of
1 and it also says the selection.
So you'll, for a VoiceOver user, all that
information is really actually really essential.
The name of the item, the role of
the item and what has selection.
So I will continue and go and select a mailbox.
>> Interact with mailboxes table,
row 2 of 13 selected, column 1 of 1.
Inbox, mailbox, 5 unread, edit text, send.
Mailbox level 1.
Trash, mailbox 1 unread, level 1, send,
mailbox, inbox, mailbox, 5 unread, level 1.
Interact with messages table, row 1 of 5.
Status from Jean LeTeam, Jean LeTeam, subject import.
You meet for lunch, meet for lunch.
>> Alright, so I'm just going to read that
message using a keyboard command, VoiceOver J.
>> Text, Hi David.
How is demo going?
Hope everything is doing fine.
Don't forget to show the cool gesture supporting VoiceOver.
How about grabbing lunch before the
Accessibility lab in the afternoon tomorrow?
Patti.
>> Alright, great.
So you'll notice that again VoiceOver is reading a lot of
text and there's quite a lot of information being conveyed.
And also there's a lot of keyboard commands involved.
I think I must have pressed around 10 keyboard
hotkeys in total to achieve the task of reading mail.
So there's always, there's something
missing from this whole exercise.
I really have no understanding at all of
the user interface currently on the screen.
And in order to deal with that as Eric
mentioned, we put in this feature that allows me
to touch, really touch the UI using my track pad.
So instead of trying to explain it further,
I'm going to just show you how that works.
>> Stop interact.
>> And I will turn it on using another command.
>> Track pad command 1, Close toolbar,
Close button, Zoom button,
Minimize button, Zoom button, inbox 5 messages, 1 unread.
>> And as you can see, there's a
highlight that shows you exactly where I am
and we've turned that on for demo purposes.
>> Toolbar, Messages, Toolbar button.
Messages, table, 1 row selected,
status, blank from Patti Hoa.
Subject Meet for lunch, date received, June 5th
2009, 5 mailboxes, table, vertical splitter.
Mailboxes, table, one row selected.
Mail Activity.
Horizontal splitter.
Mail Activity, Hide Mail Activity Button.
Mailbox Actions, Menu button, vertical splitter.
Message content, scrolled area.
>> Alright, so was that quick?
Around 10 seconds sweep of my finger across the
track pad, I've actually gotten more information
from this screen reader than I think I've
ever had with any other screen reader.
I really have a good understanding of where things are.
For example, I know that you have your usual
Close, Minimize, and Zoom buttons on the top left.
You have a toolbar spanning the width of the window.
There's a mailboxes table, separated by a
vertical splitter from the messages table
and a horizontal splitter separating
that from the messages content area.
So that type of information was really
unavailable to screen reader users before this.
And now we think that it's, it's great that we have
it and it really allows me to understand what's going
on on the screen, what's prominent on the screen.
And it allows me to go back to a
piece of UI if I know where it is.
So I'm going to reply to Patti and
tell her that I would love to do lunch.
>> Interact with message content, scroll area, two items.
Message headers text from text.
Hi David, interact with text.
Word, tomorrow, reply, now in window, RE meet for lunch.
Toolbar, sure, semi space, let's do it exclaim.
Subject. Close button.
Subject edit text.
Subject minimize, Zoom button.
To zoom button.
Toolbar, characters, interact with toolbar.
Send button.
>> And I'm just going to double-tap
this and go ahead and send the message.
>> Press, now in window, interact with
dialogue for window RE meet for lunch,
cannot send message using the server SMTP.me.
Sending a message content to, servers,
tape edit, SMTP server list.
>> Alright, so looks like we have some
connectivity issues, but that's how Gestures work
and I'll go ahead and pass it off back to Eric.
Thanks.
[ Applause ]
>> Good job.
>> Thanks.
>> OK, so the support that you saw,
Gesture Support, is built into VoiceOver.
It uses the standard accessibility APIs
which you're just about to learn about.
So it's not like this is some newfangled thing where it's
going to require tons of support by a third party apps.
It just works by taking advantage of existing APIs.
So to talk about those APIs I'd like to invite
another colleague, Patti Hoa on stage to get started.
>> OK. Well thank you Eric.
That was a great demo of the VoiceOver.
Now that you've seen a demo of VoiceOver, you're
probably wondering well how does VoiceOver interact
with the application?
Well to do that I'm going to give you an overview
of the accessibility technology that
we have on the Mac OS X platform.
[ Period of silence ]
So, after I give you an overview of the accessibility
technology, then I'm going to have Greg come up
and show you how to determine how accessible
your application with some of the tools we have.
And offer you some solutions on how
to accessorize your application.
So in order to tell you about the accessibility
technology I'll first tell you what are some
of the available assistive applications we have for
the Mac OS X CD that you have right in your hand.
And I'll explain to you what the accessibility hierarchy is,
what are some of the accessibility
information you can obtain from UI elements.
Then later on I'll show you or take you through how
VoiceOver interacts with the objects in your application.
And lastly I'll explain to you what
the NSAccessibility Protocol is.
So VoiceOver.
VoiceOver is considered an assistive application.
By that I mean application that takes advantage of the
accessibility API we have on the Mac OS X platform.
Now there are many other assistive
applications that comes with the Mac OS X CD.
One of them is the Accessibility
Inspector which is a tool that helps you
to analyze how accessible your application is.
And later in a demo we'll show you how to use this tool.
In addition, we have many other tools that help, that
takes advantage of the accessibility API for things
like UI interaction recording and UI automation testing.
And some of those tools are like the instruments, the
Watch Me Do feature of Automater and GUI scripting.
For today's purpose, I'm going to talk
about VoiceOver and focus on that.
So one of the questions you may have about
VoiceOver is well how does it access the information
about the interface in your application?
Well to do that I'll give you a simple
graphical user interface as an example.
And you'll hear me often abbreviate it as GUI.
So in this example, we have just a very
simple window with a button in there.
And this button just have an image
with a little triangle in as the image.
Well, we can interpret as maybe a
Forward button or a Play button.
For today's purpose, we're going
to just say this is a Play button.
So visually, we see these three objects.
We see your application, we see the
window and we see a button with an image.
Well, for assistive applications, they need an alternative
interface to access this very graphical user interface.
And to do that, we take advantage of
this proxy object called AXUIElementRef.
It's a very light object that reference the actual object
that represent the GUI that you see, object you see.
So in this example, an application, we know internally
it's implemented with an NSApplication object.
We have an AXUIElementRef that access these Cocoa objects.
So the AXUIElementRef can access many
accessibility information about object.
One of which is the role of the object,
which tells you what type of UI it is.
In this case, an application object
will have a role of AXApplication.
And that will be the same for like a window.
A window will have an AXUIElementRef with a
role of AXWindow and the same with a button too.
And the way these AXUIElementRef are represented is in
a tree hierarchy with a parent-child hierarchy level.
So for example, in this particular GUI
will see that the window is a child of the
that application and the button is a child of the window.
And vice versa, the window is the parent of the button.
Now as a Cocoa developer, you know the way
this GUI is implemented is slightly different.
Right? You have an NSApplication object
with a NSWindow object and inside
of it there's the NSButton object
which contains the NSButtonCell.
And you may also know that the window also
have a frame layer and also a content layer.
So obviously this is many layers, more layers than
that's relevant for the accessibility hierarchy.
So what Cocoa has is a concept called
ignoring elements that allows to you
in essence not expose certain layers
for the accessibility hierarchy.
And so in this case, NSView and
NSButton are by default ignored.
And by, when I say ignored, it doesn't mean that
all the children are hidden you know in any sense.
It just means that we pass right through those layers.
So in this case the window, NSWindow layer because the
NSView and the NSButton layers are ignored by default,
it pass right through to the NSButtonCell layer.
So with that, we're able to do a 1 to 1 mapping back
to the alternative user interface
that contains these AXUIElementRef.
So let's take a look at the button as an example.
And let's see what kind of information can
VoiceOver obtain about this piece of UI element.
Well by default you can always get the role information
which is, which tells you what type of UI it is.
In this case it's AXButton.
And then the role description gives you a
user-friendly description for that type of UI.
In this case it's button.
And then we have attributes like parent and earlier
you saw the parent-child hierarchy for this GUI
or graphical user interface and you know
that the parent of that button is the window.
So that's what we return here.
And then we have attribute like the AXTitle,
the AX top level UI element and by default most
of your UI will have the window as the top level UI
element, but if your UI sits inside a sheet or a drawer,
then you want to return that sheet
or the drawer as the UI element.
Then we have attributes such as enabled
that tells you the enabled state of that UI.
Now obviously if it's not enabled, then it's
probably grayed out or dimmed out in the interface.
Then you have focus that tells you
whether or not it has the keyboard focus.
Now, many of the buttons have labels associated with them.
Now in this, so if you do then you provide the AXTitle.
But in this case we actually have an image for this button.
So what you want to do is actually provide the
AXDescription for it and you know because you
as a developer know what this button will do.
So you have to provide description.
In this case, you know, we know this is a
Play button, so you return the string play.
Now we also have attributes for the position and
size that tells you where this UI sits on the screen.
Now these attributes allows VoiceOver to
draw its VoiceOver cursor around the UI,
which is that black rectangular box you see around the UI.
And then for some UIs they have
an action associated with it.
By action I don't mean actions for what this button can
do, but I mean actions that more of a user input action.
So we know that for a button usually
you can mouse click to press it.
So in this case, there's a AXPress action for this button.
Now, when VoiceOver land on this button, it'll
probably say something like "play button".
And that's because VoiceOver used two attributes in
specific, one is the AXDescription which has the string play
and the role description which has the string button.
So with those two alone VoiceOver
is able to speak "play button".
Now you see that whole list of attributes
that's available for the Button UI element.
Well, if you just use a standard Cocoa widget like
an NSButton or such, you'll get all of this for free.
AppKit will provide accessibility
information for that button.
The only thing you will need to
provide is the AXDescription.
And that's because AppKit has no
idea what your button would do.
So, now you know how VoiceOver access
the information from your interface.
The next question you may well have how does VoiceOver
interact with the objects in your application?
So to know that I want to first tell you that VoiceOver
sits on a separate process than your application.
And the way VoiceOver access accessibility
information from your application is
through the accessibility API which
we often abbreviate as AX API.
And then the AX API will take that request and you know
sends it off to the application that's in interest.
So to show you, give you a more detailed explanation on
how that interaction works, I'm going to use the example
of the AXRoleDescription when VoiceOver
asks for that particular attribute.
So what happens is VoiceOver first
gets that button AXUIElementRef.
And as you know goes through the AX API and asks for the
role description, that request goes over to the AppKit side
or your application and since your
application is a Cocoa application,
that AppKit accessibility infrastructure
would handle that request first.
Alright? So the AppKit sees that
button AXUIElementRef and says oh,
I can map this to the actual Cocoa object
which in this case is the NSButtonCell.
By default, you should know that it's the cell of the
control that handles the accessibility information.
OK? So in this case, AppKit will
make a request to the NSButtonCell.
And it does that through the NSAccessibility
protocol which are a bunch of methods that allows you
to access accessibility information for a Cocoa object.
And one of those methods is called
accessibilityAttributeValue
that takes the attribute as a parameter.
So in this case, the one we're interested
in is the role description attribute.
But note that I have a different
constant there for the attribute.
It's called NSAccessibilityRoleDescription.
That's equivalent to the AXRoleDescription.
This is the AppKit version of the constant.
So the AXRoleDescription is equivalent
to NSAccessibilityRoleDescription.
For your purpose when you're coding, you'll be
using the NSAccessibility version of the constant.
Alright, so AppKit sends this request to the button cell
and the button cell says oh I got
a request for the role description.
Well I know my role description is button.
So I'll return that as the string.
So now AppKit gets that answer back.
It bundles the information back into the
AXUIElementRef and sends it across to VoiceOver.
And that's how VoiceOver is able to speak button.
So now you see how the interaction work and I want to
talk a little bit about the NSAccessibility protocol.
By the way, the NSAccessibility protocol is not the
same as the Accessibility API that I mentioned earlier.
The Accessibility API or AX API is
used for assistive applications.
You as a developer of Cocoa application should focus
on the NSAccessibility API that I'm showing here.
Now you've seen one of them which is
the accessibility attribute value.
It's probably one of the ones you'll be using most often
to provide additional accessibility
information or tweak some information.
Now there are other methods like the one that returns
the list of attributes or there's a method that tells you
if an attribute is settable and sets it if you need it to.
Also, there's the parameterized version of the method
that takes, basically takes an additional parameter.
And also if your UI has some user interaction for,
then you need to provide the action that this hears,
you know like for example the AXPress action I mentioned.
And here's a list of some of the actions that are supported
like the AXPress action, AXShowMenu action, etcetera.
And also we have some other methods.
For example, the accessibility hit
test, which takes a point on the screen
and tells you what is the UIElement underneath.
It's used in applications like the Accessibility Inspector.
And the Gesture support in VoiceOver.
And also you have a focus UI element which
tells you what has the keyboard focus.
And also the accessibilityIsIgnored.
This is the method that allows you to determine if your UI
should be exposed in the accessibility hierarchy or not.
So by default we know for example that NSView is ignored.
Well if you have a custom NSView and you want
to expose it in the accessibility hierarchy,
basically you know allow VoiceOver to see it,
then you may want to consider taking a
look at this method and override that.
And also we have some notification support.
Now this is very useful because it tells you what
are the changes that's occurring on the screen.
So you know things like keyboard focus
changes, selection changes, etcetera.
By default, if you use Cocoa with just
these all done automatically for you.
But if you have some custom NSView and you want to
be, you know you might want to take a look at this
and see if you need to provide some
of these notifications yourself.
And if you do, we have API called
NSAccessibilityPostNotification that allows you
to basically provide those notifications.
So in a nutshell, this is NSAccessibility protocol.
I know this is a lot of information, but the good
news is that if you use standard Cocoa widgets,
you wouldn't have to do much at all because
AppKit will do most of this work for you.
OK? And with that, I'm going to now
turn over to Greg Hughes to show you how
to determine how accessible your
application is and offer you some
of the solutions on how to accessorize your application.
>> So as Patti said, I'm going to show
you how to audit your application.
And by audit I mean how you can examine your application
for the areas where accessibility could be improved.
And that includes areas where accessibility
is lacking completely
and areas where the accessibility information just
isn't quite enough or you could add more information
and it would be really helpful to a VoiceOver user.
And so to demo this, I'm going to use
the old Apple example called Sketch.
It has been a developer example back in Leopard and
its also available in the Snow Leopard Developer Tools.
[ Period of silence ]
So here we have Sketch.
We have a main, pretty simple window
where we can draw shapes.
We have a Tool Palette.
And also a Tool Inspector.
Whenever looking at accessorizing an application,
the first thing I always use is VoiceOver.
I find it gives me a pretty quick way to
look at the overview of the application.
There's also another tool, Accessibility
Inspector which I'll show you after.
So I'm going to start VoiceOver.
[ Background noise ]
And it looks like we don't have sound.
>> Log on, building line output.
Sketch window, graphics, now in
window, sample, 100%, pop-up button.
>> OK, so now we have VoiceOver on and we just
heard that we're currently on a pop-up button.
So when looking at an application, I
always try to start at the top level.
I look at the window level of the application.
So I'm going to bring up VoiceOver's window
Chooser which shows me a list of current windows.
>> VoiceOver Help menu, six items.
>> Since we'll assume I forgot the command, we have a really
nice help system where I can look up any command line voice.
>> Control option question.
>> Where I can look up any command with VoiceOver.
>> Commands Help menu, Commands Help menu, 13, 10
items, Window Chooser menu, control option F2, F2.
Window Chooser menu, 3 items.
>> So here we have the Window Chooser.
And we see the first problem with this application.
One of our windows is just called untitled.
And that doesn't really give a VoiceOver user
much information for what that window contains.
So if I arrow down to that window, we'll see the VoiceOver
cursor, the small black bar highlight around the toolbar.
>> Preview current, untitled.
>> And so we see now in this tool palette,
instead of untitled, this should say Tool Palette
or something more, or something appropriate.
So if we continue now and look at the Tool
Palette and at the items inside of it.
>> Selected radio button one of five.
Radio button two of five.
Radio button three of five.
>> We see that the radio buttons, the buttons on
this Tool Palette, don't provide a description.
And arguably, or most of you, many developers might
argue that radio button really isn't accurate here
because they don't look like a radio button.
But to a VoiceOver user, it behaves
exactly like a radio button.
Only one of these can be selected at a
time and when you select another one,
the one that was selected becomes deselected.
So from an accessibility standpoint, these are radio buttons
but we just don't have a description,
we don't know what they do.
So if we continue on and look at another window.
>> Window, Window Chooser menu, three
items, preview current graphics.
Window 3.32, edit text content selected.
>> So we see here that we just heard
3.32 edit text content selected.
We don't really know what this value means.
And if we move along to another edit box in this window.
>> 131.00 edit text content selected.
>> So we have a lot of information
and the information is accurate.
But there's more information that
could be told to a VoiceOver user.
There's more information that could be output.
And that's a label for these fields.
There's really no contextual information.
I could move around and infer here that the label
to the left width is what is supposed
to go along with this edit text.
But it'd be much better if the developer here could provide
a label for this field programmatically so that we know
from a VoiceOver standpoint what
we should output as the label.
>> 3.32 edit text content, 18.4% slider.
>> And here for the slider, we just hear a percentage.
So again, the output isn't wrong, it's just not the
best output that could be provided to a VoiceOver user.
The percentage represents where the slider is, but it
doesn't tell me that it's really going to be a pixel value.
It doesn't tell me that 3.32 value
that's displayed next to the slider.
And if I jump now back to the main window.
>> Window, Window Chooser menu,
three items, preview current sample.
100%, pop-up button.
>> Here when auditing your application, you'd go through
and make sure you can do the entire
workflow using just VoiceOver.
Alternatively the entire workflow using just the keyboard.
And with Sketch, we quickly find out that we
can't add any shapes without using the mouse.
This program requires you to move the mouse,
click and drag in order to add a shape.
And so this is a part of accessibility
that's really important.
And that's making sure that your application can be used by
users who might not have enough mobility to use the mouse
or users who might be using just VoiceOver.
And therefore not have access to the mouse.
And the last problem we'll see here is that this
drawing area is not accessible with VoiceOver.
If I try to move to it now.
[ Tones ]
I just get an error sound, meaning that
there are no more elements to move to.
And this is because this is a custom view and
by default NSViews are ignored by accessibility.
Because they could be representing anything and it's up
to the developer to implement accessibility for that view.
So now I'd like to show you Accessibility Inspector.
>> VoiceOver off.
[ Period of silence ]
>> And Accessibility Inspector is another
great tool for auditing your application.
But I personally find it much more
handy when I'm programming.
To use it, you just hover your mouse over any component.
Here I'll hover over one of the buttons.
And we see all of the accessibility
information that's returned.
So when I'm auditing an application,
I find this a bit overwhelming.
I don't really know what's missing, I
don't know what really should be there.
For example here, it's tough to notice quickly by looking
at this that there's no title or there's no description.
Whereas with VoiceOver we saw that in a matter of seconds.
When I switch and I'm programming, it's really
nice here to make sure that the proper title
or the proper description is returned or that any
of these other values are actually what
I'm sending back from my application.
One nice thing about Accessibility Inspector is
that you can lock on to an element using Command-F7.
And you see here it highlighted
the button in a light shade of red.
And with Accessibility Inspector, I can navigate now up and
down the accessibility tree with the pop-up button here.
So I can go up to the container and then all the way up to
the window and look at the accessibility information there.
And this is really helpful when you're trying to find
problems with the accessibility hierarchy because in order
for VoiceOver and other assistive applications to
work properly, the accessibility hierarchy needs
to be intact both going up the
tree and coming back down the tree.
So this is a nice way to be able to find those
problems and navigate through your application.
So now we've looked at our application.
We've seen the problems with it and we've seen areas
that were lacking accessibility information completely
and also areas where the accessibility
information could be improved.
Specifically in Sketch, we saw six problems.
The first problem was the window, the Tool Palette didn't
have a description and we didn't know what was in that.
We just heard untitled from the VoiceOver window Chooser.
Next we saw the buttons in the Tool
Palette didn't have descriptions,
landing on them we heard radio
button 1 of 5, radio button 4 of 5.
And the radio button part was accurate,
but we really need a description.
We need to know that this is the Circle
tool or this is the Selection tool.
Next we saw that in the Inspector, the edit fields
and other controls in the Inspector didn't have labels
and so an assistive technology user would have to try to
navigate around and infer what value they were changing.
And in most applications, there would be a fair
amount of success, but depending on the layout,
this can be really tricky for a VoiceOver user.
And it ends up requiring a lot of guessing.
So here's where we could improve accessibility.
We also saw that VoiceOver didn't really
give us informative output for the slider.
We heard a percentage instead of the value
that the slider is actually representing.
And this is just kind of the inherent nature of sliders.
They provide a value back to the programmer of the
application, which then has to interpret that value.
Well, for accessibility reasons
it's good for that interpreted value
to also be returned over the accessibility API.
We then saw that the application didn't
have, provide full keyboard access.
The application required the user to use the mouse.
And this is a really big part of
accessibility as I mentioned a minute ago.
And it's making sure that your application has multiple
methods of navigation, multiple methods of input.
Specifically the keyboard and mouse.
Last we saw that the canvas area was inaccessible.
This is because it's in NSView and there's no accessibility
information added here and AppKit could really only guess.
Unfortunately we're not mind readers yet and we
don't know what a custom view is going to contain.
So here's also another area where there is no
accessibility information in this application.
During this talk, I'm not going to have a
chance to get to accessorizing this custom view.
But there's going to be a really great talk
on Friday about advanced accessibility.
And it'll pretty much pick up where we left off and talk
about customizing or sorry, accessorizing your custom views.
And it'll use Sketch as the example
view in accessorizing that
So now we have our list of problems.
So what you would generally do with this list is just
like any other bug or enhancement you're working on,
prioritize them based on what's the most important
area of your application to be accessible.
Sometimes it's tempting to grab the low hanging
fruits but generally it's more important
to do the area that's used more often by users.
So here we're just going to go through
them in the order that we found.
Generally here we probably want to start with the canvas,
but unfortunately since that's the most difficult,
we will start just as I said in
the order that we found them.
So the first one was that the window title, that
we didn't have a description for the Tool Palette.
For argument sake, let's assume here that
the developer didn't want to have a title.
Generally or sorry, all the time if there was a title, this
title would be provided over the Accessibility API for us.
So assuming that for whatever reason the developer
didn't want to have a title as in this case,
we're going to have to provide a description.
And specifically we're going
to use the NSAccessibilityDescriptionAttribute
to provide that description.
This is a human readable, localized string that should
be in all lower case and you want to make sure not
to confuse this with the role description.
This description is going to tell us what the button does.
For example, the word print.
It's not going to tell us that it's a button.
And you want to also make sure not to
include the role in the description.
Otherwise you'll get output like Print button button.
So how do you provide this?
Well the easiest way is to use Interface Builder.
And in Interface Builder all you do is bring
up the Inspector for any object you want
to add this accessibility description to and
in the Inspector there's an Accessibility tab.
And you can add the description or the help right in there.
And just like the rest of your project, you would
want to localize this with the rest of your nib.
However this isn't always an option.
Specifically in this case, you can't add a
description in Interface Builder on Windows
because the assumption is that there will always be a title.
But in some cases you don't always have an object
in Interface Builder that you can add this to
or maybe you add something to your nib programmatically.
So we also have ways to do this programmatically.
On the class level, you can override the methods
accessibilityAttributesNames which returns a list of all
of the attributes that that object supports.
And accessibilityAttributeValue, which given a specific
accessibility value returns the value for that attribute.
So these have a few downfalls.
They need to be used in the right place.
Specifically on the class level, now these are
going to be used for all instances of that class.
So if you had a button class that was used all over
your application it might be difficult to do this
on the class level because all
of your buttons don't mean print.
So here we can also use accessibilitySetOverride
forAttribute.
And this allows us, given a single
object, to set the accessibility override.
So this takes a value in the attribute that we
want to override and it sets it on that object.
The two important things to remember when
using accessibilitySetOverride is first
that this shouldn't be used for dynamic values.
This should be used for a value that stays the same.
For example, we saw with the description of this window.
That's not going to change.
If something is going to change a
lot, then we don't want to use this.
But also we want to use this specifically only
for description, title, sorry, it's description,
title UI element, linked UI element and help.
And there are quite a few reasons for this.
You can come and talk to any one of
us later if you're really interested.
But for now let's just take this on the assumption
there's only these four this should be used for.
So we've solved the problem now or we've seen a few
solutions on how we can add a description to the window.
How about the buttons?
Well we could use any of those existing,
any of those three methods that we just saw.
But we found that a lot of you have a
lot of images all over your application.
And so for Snow Leopard we have a
great new API and some great new ways
to add accessibility information on these images.
So given an object that is an NSImage,
you can do setAccessibilityDescription
and provide a description for that image.
Now, automatically this description
will be picked up by some Cocoa objects,
specifically in our case the NSButtonCell.
And that description will be used automatically.
But now we have an even easier way to
provide accessibility descriptions on images.
And that's that we've built in strings file support.
So as an example, let's assume we have our circle
image here that's loaded as an NSImage or even used
in Interface Builder as the content of a button cell.
If in our project we created a file called
AccessibilityImageDescriptions.strings.
We could add a line that says circle equals circle tool.
Now automatically AppKit is going to see this, attach
this as the, link this as the image description
and then the NSButtonCell will use that automatically.
And this is really, really helpful because now it allows
me to isolate where I'm adding all these descriptions.
So rather than go through my code and find where all
these buttons are or where all the images are loaded,
I can just add this one strings file in one place
and add all the image descriptions right there.
The one slight downside is that
this image description now is going
to be used every time that image shows up in your UI.
So if you have something like an Add button, and
in one location in your UI it meant add person,
in another location it meant add mailbox, adding in a line
entry here isn't really the best solution because you want
to have a different entry for both buttons.
So you would have to choose another programmatic solution.
So now we've seen how to add descriptions and we
can move along to how we can improve the interface,
how we can add labels for some of these UI elements.
So this is really, really simple.
And like description, we can do it in Interface Builder.
We can just control-drag from the object we
want to label to the label and select title.
And the easiest way to remember this is just
like anything else in Interface Builder.
You always start at the object that
needs to know about the other object.
In this case, the text field needs
to know what its label is.
And then you just select title.
So again like any of the other accessibility
attributes, we can also do this in code.
We can override the accessibility attribute names to make
sure that we're returning NSAccessibility title attribute.
Sorry, title UI attribute in this
array of support attributes.
And then we'd return the appropriate element
when asked for the title UI attribute.
As we saw earlier, this is also
one of the appropriate attributes
or one of the safe attributes to
use with set accessibility override.
So we could do that on the object level as well.
Now with NSAccessibility TitleUI element, you'd
almost always want to do this on the object level.
There would be very, very few cases where you would want all
objects of a single class to have the same TitleUI element.
[ Period of silence ]
So if we move along to the slider.
The slider gave us a percentage value, it
didn't give us the actual value of the slider.
So here again we want to provide more informative output.
And for the slider, the way that we're going to do that
is through the NSAccessibilityValueDescriptionAttribute.
Unfortunately since we saw that this is both a
dynamic value and not one of the safe values to use
with set accessibility override, we're
going to have to do this on the class level.
And here we're going to override
these same two methods again.
accessibilityAttributeValue and accessibilityAttributeNames.
And this is the third time I've shown this
and it's because it's really important
that you think of these two methods together.
Anything that you support in accessibilityAttributeValues
has to be one
of the values returned by accessibilityAttributeNames.
I can say I personally have countless times added all
the code to accessibilityAttributeValues but not added
that I added the value, the attribute
to accessibilityAttributeNames.
So then that information was never used because any
client didn't know that my object was supporting
for example NSAccessibility value description.
So it's really important here to make
sure that these two methods are in synch.
That they both support the same attributes.
And you also want to try to remember
not to add an object to the array twice.
As you'll see in the demo, we're going to
append NSAccessibilityValueDescriptionAttribute
onto the array of attributes that super supports.
[ Period of silence ]
So the last problem we saw that we're going to be
able to address here is the full keyboard navigation.
How can we add keyboard navigation to this application?
Unfortunately that alone could take up an
entire presentation because there are tons
of different techniques and tons of different ways.
And it's really application specific.
Generally the best course of action is
to add menu items and keyboard shortcuts.
But maybe your application is more graphical and
might require different technique or more keystrokes
or arrow navigation to allow full keyboard
access to a user who might not use the mouse.
So for accessibility purposes here where we
can look at examples of the accessibility API,
we really now have four issues that we can deal with.
First again was the title of the window.
And I'm going to show you how we can solve this now with
all of our accessibility APIs that we've talked about.
We're going to choose some and implement them.
Here to fix this, I'm going to choose to use
the accessibilitySetOverride forAttribute method
on the NSAccessibilityDescriptionAttribute.
For the buttons in the toolbar, I'm going to use
the AccessibilityImageDescriptions strings file.
And there we can have one isolated place where we add
all of our image descriptions for all of our buttons
and it will automatically be used by the Cocoa buttons.
[ Period of silence ]
Then we saw the Title UI elements.
And the easiest way to do this is just in Interface
Builder, we're going to link up the controls
to the element that we want as the label.
[ Period of silence ]
And lastly for the slider that gave
us a percentage rather than a value,
this is probably the hardest one we're going to do.
But as you'll see in a moment, it's still really,
really simple and it doesn't take much time at all.
And this is that we're going to
have to subclass NSSliderCell.
And override the two methods accessibilityAttributesNames
and accessibility attribute description.
Sorry, accessibilityAttributeValue is the other method.
[ Period of silence ]
So here we have our game plan for how we
can go ahead and begin accessorizing Sketch.
And we can get right into it.
[ Period of silence ]
So here we have our Sketch project.
And as we said the first thing we wanted to look
at and fix was the title of that Tool Palette.
[ Period of silence ]
So here I have the Tool Palette controller.
And I can find the windowDidLoad method.
[ Period of silence ]
And in this method, I'm just going
to add two very simple lines of code.
[ Period of silence ]
[ Background noise ]
And so here the first line of code is
just generating a localized string.
This is important to remember with
all of the accessibility API.
You want to make sure that these strings, just like
your UI are localized appropriately for the interface.
So here we're going to generate a
localized string for Tool Palette.
And then we're going to use set accessibility
override for the window and we're going
to set the override for NSAccessibilityDescriptionAttribute.
Here one other little tidbit that's really useful, I know
that window in this case supports accessibility description.
But as Patti said earlier, buttons don't.
So if for example I had an IB outlet to a button,
this wouldn't work because the button isn't
what I set the accessibility override on.
It's the button cell.
And so there it's a really nice way to approach that is that
there's a method called NSAccessibility unignore descendent.
And so you can use NSAccessibility unignore
descendent on self, that will return the button cell
and then you can set the override on the button cell.
And so that's a really common mistake that a lot
of developers make that you need to make sure
that you're setting the value on the appropriate controller,
the controller that handles the accessibility information.
[ Period of silence ]
So now we saw, the next thing we saw was that
we wanted to add a description to the buttons.
And the way to do this as I said, the solution
I chose here was to use the new Snow Leopard API
of AccessibilityImageDescriptions strings file.
I have already written so I don't
have to type it over again.
[ Period of silence ]
And here we have really simple entries
like circle equals circle tool.
And you'll notice that circle is
the exact name of the image.
And that's obviously the important part here.
That's what links up the image description to
the image that your application is going to load.
So that's all I need to do here and this
is what makes the strings file really nice.
I don't have to go through my code
and find where these images are used.
I just add this one file.
Next we saw that the items in the
Inspector didn't have title UI elements.
They didn't provide that contextual information.
So we're going to open up the Inspector.
[ Period of silence ]
[ Background noise ]
And as I said, this is really simple.
All I do is Control-drag from the object I want
to label, to the label, and then select title.
And so I've already done this for the
rest of the controls in this window.
Here's also a good thing to point out.
The description is really easy to set
right here if I wanted to or the help.
So that's all there is to adding those labels.
I'll just save that.
[ Period of silence ]
And back to Xcode.
Now the last thing I said we were
going to do is subclass NSSliderCell.
And this is the most difficult thing we're going to do
for accessorizing this application only because we have
to subclass and a lot of developers
we found are afraid of sub classing.
But it's nothing you need to be
afraid of for the NSSliderCell.
It's really not that much work to add this accessibility.
[ Period of silence ]
So here I'm going to just add a new
file and it's an Objective-C class.
[ Period of silence ]
And I'm going to name it accordingly, according
to the naming convention of this project.
Now here's a good point to note when
doing accessibility of your project.
Sometimes it's really nice to keep accessibility
completely out of the rest of your code.
And by that I mean create an accessibility
files for each of your classes.
And you can create protocols for your class.
In the class of this project, our accessibility
code is interweaved within the rest of the code,
which has its advantages and its disadvantages.
So for your project you generally want to
choose one of those two and stick to it.
Like the rest of coding conventions.
[ Period of silence ]
So here we have our pixel slider.
And this isn't going to inherit from NSObject, it's
just going to be, it's going to be an NSSliderCell.
[ Period of silence ]
And the implementation again is pretty simple.
We just have these two methods.
The first one, accessibilityAttributeNames.
And this method as I said earlier is going to return an
array of all of the attributes that our object supports.
Well our object is going to support all of
the attribute names that super supports along
with NSAccessibilityValueDescriptionAttribute.
Then we have, sorry, then we have
accessibilityAttributeValue.
And as I said, all this method does is given a
specific value it needs to return the attribute.
So given NSAccessibilityValueDescriptionAttribute, we're
going to return a localized string representing the number.
And so here it looks a bit complex, but it's just
localizing the number format so that if your locale is set
to use a comma instead of a period, we'll
properly use a comma instead of a period here.
And then importantly, we don't want
to have to deal with everything else
because super already knows how to deal with it.
So if we're asked for something like our frame or
our position on screen, we just pass that call off
to NSSliderCell because the NSSliderCell knows where we are.
[ Period of silence ]
So the last important thing here is to tell
that slider to use our custom slider cell.
[ Period of silence ]
And that's it.
Here we have our accessorized Sketch application.
[ Period of silence ]
And if I start VoiceOver we can verify that all of our
accessibility information has shown up in this application.
>> VoiceOver on, Sketch window
sample, 100%, pop-up button, window,
Window Chooser menu, three items, graphics, Tool Palette.
>> Here we see the Tool Palette has the
appropriate name in the Window Chooser.
>> Selection tool, selected radio button, 1 of 5, Rectangle
tool, radio button 2 of 5, Circle tool, radio button 3 of 5.
>> We see that all of the tools in the Tool Palette
have the appropriate descriptions that were brought
in from the strings file automatically
with very little work on our part.
>> Window Tool palette.
Window Chooser menu.
Pre current graphics.
Window fit, yellow at 3.32, line
width edit text content selected.
>> So here we now hear the label.
We heard 3.32 line width.
Because line width was the label for that field.
>> 131.00, width edit text content selected.
>> And again we heard that width,
we heard width after the value.
So that's telling us that width is the label for this field.
If I now go up to the slider.
>> 3.3.32, line width slider.
>> Now we hear 3.32 line width slider.
Which is much more informative to a VoiceOver user
than 18.4% as we heard earlier when we did our demo.
>> VoiceOver off.
>> So just as we saw before, we can
now use Accessibility Inspector.
[ Period of silence ]
And we can see now for this button, we properly have an AX
description which tells us what this button is representing.
So we go through it again, just we did with VoiceOver and
use Accessibility Inspector to look at the rest of this UI
to verify that everything that we've done works.
The one last thing that I've gone ahead and done
is that I've added full keyboard navigation.
So I can use hot keys or VoiceOver
commands to go to these menu options.
And the object is drawn for me and I can then use the
Inspector here to move it anywhere on the screen I want.
[ Period of silence ]
So now we saw that it was really simple to
add all of the accessibility information.
It probably took me about three or
four minutes to add the information
to our application and it makes a huge difference.
We still have that canvas area which again I encourage
you to go to the talk on Friday on Advanced Accessibility.
But the rest of it we have a vast improvement.
Before we couldn't get to the button,
we didn't know what windows were called
and there was no contextual information
in the Tool Inspector.
So we've made a huge difference in a very
short amount of time on this application.
And really it doesn't take much effort.
The biggest challenge is to just go in
and start auditing your applications.
And so we have some final thoughts.
And throughout this talk, the first thing
we saw was that accessibility provides a lot
of great benefits for both you and your end users.
For you it allows you to do a lot of GUI scripting, it
allows you to use instruments in a more powerful way.
It also allows you to use Automater Watch Me Do.
And these are all important tools when trying
to reproduce bugs or script certain unit tests
or script just general tests for your application.
Without accessibility information, all
of these things are much more difficult.
For your end users, they get all
that, all those same benefits.
They can use scripting to automate different tasks.
But it also extends your marketability to the VoiceOver
audience, to users who are using assistive technology.
And there are just two, there are two
main steps that you need to remember
about your application on how to accessorize.
It can be a bit overwhelming to look at
an application, wonder where to start.
And then the first is just either you use
Accessibility Inspector or my personal favorite,
VoiceOver to audit your application, to look
at where do you need accessibility information?
And generally you'll be a bit surprised
at how much information is already there.
Then once you've analyzed your application, look at the APIs
and figure out what API is appropriate for your problem.
And most often, it's just a simple
Interface Builder solution
to either add a description or add a title UI element.
There's a lot of resources available.
There is a contact at Apple, Eric Hope, but we also have
a really great public developer list for accessibility.
And Apple engineers read this list and
generally respond in a really timely manner.
But also the community responds with a lot of
helpful information if you have any questions.
I'd strongly recommend using this list.
There's also the accessibility documentation
and we have a great new website which has a lot
of accessibility information both
developer related and end user related.
So if you're just generally interested in accessibility
at Apple, this is a great resource as well.